Another approach to baseline correction is by utilizing the concept of local minimum
values (LMVs) [46]. The approach consists of three stages, namely: i) initialization, ii)
iterative optimization, and iii) an estimation of background drift. In the first stage a
set of data points are assigned as local minimum values if the following set of
conditions are satisfied:
𝑥𝑖−1 > 𝑥𝑖(6.7a)
𝑥𝑖 < 𝑥𝑖+1(6.7b)
In which 𝑥𝑖 is the ith data point in the chromatogram, while 𝑥𝑖−1 and 𝑥𝑖+1 are the data
points before and after 𝑥𝑖 . A chromatogram with LMVs selected is illustrated in
Figure 6.2.
The complete set of LMVs is stored in a “minimum vector” and consists of
chromatographic peak points and noise. This minimum vector is shown in Figure
6.2-B. Any of the peak points that may have been included in the minimum vector
are treated as outliers and removed by utilizing a moving-window strategy. This
requires an a priori estimation of the appropriate width of the moving window. The
initial minimum vector that still contains outliers and the corrected minimum vector
are shown in Figure 6.2-B and 6.2-C, respectively. Any point with a signal-to-noise
ratio (S/N) larger than 2.5 is considered a peak point and replaced with the median
value of an extracted vector from the window in which that point occurs. This strategy
is then repeated until convergence. After the iterative optimization stage, the
baseline is estimated by linear interpolation. The corrected chromatogram is
ultimately obtained by subtracting the estimated baseline from the original data, as
is illustrated in Figure 6.2-D.
The LMV method was compared with morphologically-penalized-least-squares
(MPLS) [28] and moving-window-minimum-value (MWMV) methods [47] using both
simulated and GC data. The simulated data consisted of both single and overlapping
peaks, with the latter being comprised of contributions of two, three or four peaks.
Using the simulated data, peak areas and standard deviations were determined after
background correction by local minimum values-robust statistical analysis (LMV-
RSA), MWMV and MPLS at different levels of noise. It was demonstrated that the
LMV-RSA approach yielded the most-accurate peak areas and the lowest standard
deviations, with recoveries close to 100% in all cases and standard deviations below
4.5% at all but the highest noise level. MWMV performed slightly worse, while MPLS
generally resulted in significantly lower peak areas, especially in the case of
overlapping peaks, with recoveries of around 53% and 74% for the peak clusters
containing three and four peaks, respectively. The influence of the moving-window
width (in the range between 20 and 80 data points) was found negligible for the GC
data set.
Additionally, the LMV approach was compared to the “background drift correction
by orthogonal subspace projection” (BD-OSP) method, which was utilized for the LC-
QTOF-MS data [41]. In this case the differences were only assessed qualitatively. It
was shown that after correction with BD-OSP, total-ion-current (TIC) data still
contained background drift, whereas data corrected with LMV-RSA did not contain
background drift but had lost part of the information contained in the TIC [44]. The
comparisons showed that LMV-RSA performed comparably or better than the MPLS,
MWMV and OSP approaches. However, as also stated by the authors, it is important
to note that the technique can only be applied if local minimum values can be
assigned.